I
[Music]
ladies and gentlemen good evening and
thank you for bringing something like
Clement weather with you for the first
time in well rather a while my name is
David where's Lee the co-owner of
Wordsworth books in Waterloo I would
like to acknowledge that we are on the
traditional territory of the Otter water
on an ashabi and hoda no Shani people's
the center for international governance
innovation is situated on the hall to
attract that the land proposed promised
right to the Six Nations that includes
six miles on each side the Red River any
proper noun mistakes and that were
entirely my own along with CG the center
for international governance innovation
Wordsworth is thrilled and honored to
welcome Chris Hedges to Waterloo this
evening I'd like to thank the CG staff
in particular Andrea Harding and Bryan
Atchison for their help in putting all
of this together for getting all of the
details right and for crossing all of
the crossing all of the eyes and T's
penguin Random House of Canada for all
looking a whole bunch of unpaid invoices
from Wordsworth and who's still getting
copies of America the failed war tour to
to us this evening
Thank You pentagram thank you paying
with Random House C G's mandate focuses
on the among many other things realized
the global economy global security and
politics international law when we heard
from the aforementioned penguin Random
House the Christmas tour in Canada we
asked the CG would co-host a possible
book launch given the content of the new
book there is well simply not a better
partner or venue Chris Hedges
is the author of 13 books username
Minister he was a foreign correspondent
for about 20 years reporting from all
over the world he is a columnist for the
progressive news site TruthDig wish
which in addition to this is required
reading
right from the first book war is a force
that gives us me Chris Hedges has
established himself as a progressive
voice in American discourse with a
reporter's eye for story the evocative
with the evocative and fluid nature of
his writing and his singular ability to
bring politics into the home into the
street at a time when mere facts are in
dispute to say nothing of political
solutions and the mechanics to bring
them to the fore we need both
infrastructure like CG and voices like
Chris Hedges
more than ever Chris will be up here in
a mere moment he will be joined a little
bit later by Darren Malloy Darren is the
chair of the history department at
Wilfrid Laurier University and he
teaches widely on American history with
a particular interest in the US since
the end of the Second World War
Darren has written three books including
the just-released
enemies of the state the radical right
in America from FDR to Trump that is my
time ladies and gentlemen please welcome
Chris Hedges
thank you I am gonna take 30 or 40
minutes and try and explain what's
happened in the United States and
perhaps talk a little bit about where I
think it's headed Donald Trump is the
result of a long process of decay of
democratic institutions an assault
against the economy and the culture by
corporate power
he's the natural consequence of a
degenerate society he is the symptom not
the disease and since I came back from
overseas I have written several books
that have attempted to diagnose what's
gone wrong in the United States death of
the liberal class Empire of illusion the
end of literacy and the triumph of
spectacle American fascists the
Christian Right and the war on America
and I did not use the word fascist
lightly I am a Seminary graduate and in
fact am although I don't broadcast it
much an ordained Presbyterian minister I
look at these people as Christian
heretics who have distorted the biblical
message to sacra lies the worst elements
of American imperialism and American
capitalism and part of my critique
against the liberal class includes the
failure of the liberal Church to call
these people out for who they are you
don't have to spend three years as I did
at Harvard Divinity School to understand
that Jesus did not come to make us rich
I did a book with the great cartoonist
joe sacco called days of destruction
days of revolt where we went to the
poorest pockets of the United States
literally Camden New Jersey for example
which per capita is the poorest city in
America and not surprisingly always has
one of the highest homicide rates in
America to talk about sacrifice zones
and that of course is something you as
Canadians have to cope with the tar
sands being one of the largest sacrifice
zones in North America along with the
coal fields of southern West Virginia in
Northern Kentucky where we also wrote a
chapter and if you want to understand
what a poisoned toxic landscape looks
like when these people are finished you
should fly as Joe and I did over the
denuded and scarred Appalachian
Mountains where the tops blown off and
the trees gone and billion gallon toxic
ponds of lead and heavy metals every two
hours we were driving through these old
coal fields we'd have to stop and clean
off our back window because it was black
with dust you went into elementary
schools and you went to the nurse's
office and there were just rows of
little inhalers with the name of every
child on it that's the world that these
corporations will create as the globe
becomes one big sacrifice zone John
Ralston saw I had dinner with last night
in Toronto talks about corporate coup
d'etat in slow motion and that's a
phrase I often use because I think it's
correct
we saw and it hardly unique to the
United States an assault by
global corporations beginning in
particular in the early 1970s to roll
back with the Harvard political
scientist Samuel Huntington called
the excess of democracy and if you know
about Lewis Powell he later went on to
sit on the Supreme Court the Powell memo
of 1971
it's called attack on the free
enterprise system he actually names
Ralph Nader in that memo as somebody
that they have to take down at the time
Ralph's running the largest and most
effective consumer advocacy movement in
the country and you saw the elites
essentially seize control not only of
academia whole economic departments
purging critics of global capitalism
unfettered democra capitalism what we
call neoliberalism taking control of
media platforms and most importantly
capturing screw corporate money our two
major political parties we only really
at this point in America have one
political party it's called a corporate
party you have the right wing of the
corporate party promoting the kind of
nativism and Islamophobia and
demonization of undocumented workers and
then you have the the court of more
enlightened wing of the corporate party
which doesn't want to be seen as racist
or misogynist
but the structures of power both
imperial and economic remain completely
untouched which is why you have complete
continuity for instance between the Bush
administration and the Obama
administration and I spent a lot of time
in death of the little class I actually
go all the way back to World War one
with Wilson because on the eve of World
War one we had very powerful radical
movements that were on the cusp of
taking power
and they were effectively crushed during
the war in the name of fighting anti-war
sentiment and then destroyed afterwards
and the Palmer Raids and the Red Scare
and and but Clinton we had we had we had
a couple resurgence as one being with
the breakdown of capitalism in the 30s
and then again in the 1960s but by the
time Bill Clinton came to power he had
essentially transformed the Democratic
Party into the Republican Party and he
had pushed the Republican Party so far
to the right that it became insane
and all much of the devastation that
we're dealing with including NAFTA or
the 1994 omnibus crime bill which
exploded our prison population from
700,000 to two million or the
deregulation of the FCC which now allows
about five or six corporations to
control what 90% of Americans watch or
listen to glass-steagall and canter did
not have a banking crisis because Creta
did not allow the firewalls between
commercial and investment banks to be
ripped down the way Clinton did
precipitating both the national and the
global meltdown and I would say that our
moment of distress began it was or let's
say it except was accelerated by the
betrayal of the Democratic Party under
Clinton which knew that if it did
corporate bidding it would get corporate
money which it did so by the 90s the
Democratic Party had fund raising parity
with the Republicans and when Barack
Obama ran for president in 2008 he
actually got more corporate money than
his rival his Republican rivals so this
the the devastation was accelerated the
deindustrialization was Excel
raided and that American working class
and in particular the white working
class began to fall into a state of
tremendous distress barbara ehrenreich
and her very fine book nickel-and-dime
calls the plight of the working poor in
the United States one long emergency at
the same time we became captive to or
entertainment let's say seeped into
every aspect of American life including
of course info entertainment but also in
terms of politics politicians surrounded
themselves with very skillful public
relations mandarins
who created fictional personalities if
you remember you know George Bush is
somebody'd want to have a beer with kind
of stuff
and it made we were made to confuse how
we were made to feel with knowledge
political rhetoric became almost
childlike so cliche ridden so slogan
ridden as to be utterly devoid of
content and what we watched in this last
presidential election with Trump and
Trump of course himself is is a is a
menu for his his public persona is a
manufactured personality on the reality
television show The Apprentice his
actual record is as a business person is
abysmal numerous bankruptcies defrauding
contractors and creditors and and you
when you watch the Muller investigation
it's very clear that what they are what
they have on Trump is not any serious
collusion with Russia or Russia to not
steal our elections but dirty money from
Russian oligarchs and the Russian mob
that Trump laundered I hear through
Cypriot banks
into his failing real-estate empire but
Trump who comes out of that reality
television culture was able to play the
reality television game better than Jeb
Bush or Mitt Romney or in the end
Hillary Clinton and the invective the
the vulgarity all of this stuff for a
population that has largely lost faith
in the ruling elites and lost faith in
the ruling ideology of neoliberalism at
least was cathartic in a sense that it
expressed the rage and I would argue
legitimate rage by a dispossessed
American working class and in particular
white working-class so there's been a
long period of severe decay within
American society which is not it
reported on it it's been rendered
invisible by cable outlets such as CNN
which is endless burlesque which
actually fuels and feeds the reality
television presidency if you go back and
look at the presidential election Trump
had 23 times the airtime of Bernie
Sanders because Trump was unpredictable
mercurial entertaining in a way that
Sanders wasn't and the the since the
election as the head of CBS and others
sucker have admitted Trump has proved to
be extremely good for business CNN made
more money a billion dollars last year
than they've ever made but of course
it's it accelerates the assault against
American democracy it is all gossip from
porn stars or the lawyers of porn stars
who want to run for president or former
reality television personality
like Omarosa or endless speculation
about you know what a member of the
power league will or won't do and
meanwhile the plight of the vast
majority of Americans goes unrecognized
and unreported and what I set out to do
in this book as opposed to the other
books was visit and I was all over the
country for two years visit communities
that had been hit by this economic
assault and this concentration of wealth
into the hands of an American oligarchic
class so that income disparity is now
greater than it was in the Gilded Age
it's worse than it's ever been in the
United States what that was doing to
people psychologically emotionally as
well as physically and though we always
have models or writers do I do certainly
models for books when I did days of
destruction days revolt the with Joe
Sacco the model was let us now praise
famous men with Walker Evans taking the
photographs and James Agee writing the
book this book it was a meal Durkheim
study of suicide that he published in
the late nineteenth century in France
where he went and tried to explore what
is it that drove people to commit
suicide and that's where he coins the
term anomie that alienation that
disconnectedness
that sense of stagnation despair a loss
of worth that plunged people into a
state where they wanted to take their
own life and American society and again
this is these you know this is something
that Canadian society copes with is
plagued by an opioid epidemic 76,000
Americans died of overdoses last year
and and that's and many of them many
many thousands more came
and were revived gambling and suicide
the rise of white hate groups and so I
went to these I was with heroin addicts
I was with white hate groups
I was with dispossessed workers for
instance in Anderson Indiana where GM
originally had many of its major plants
now it's all they all moved to Monterrey
Mexico where they're paying Mexican
workers $3 an hour without benefits
and so these old UAW auto workers who
made 25 or $30 an hour had pension plans
had medical benefits had a union to to
provide or protect them from corporate
abuse they they lost their jobs all of
them 25,000 of them and the city went
into freefall so in Anderson looks like
many of the d industrialized wastelands
across the united states which is
suffering from of course they built a
casino as a form of economic development
and with the opioid abuse I mean it's
all of those attendant problems all of
those pathologies that come out of a
decayed or destroyed culture and I
wanted to look at those pathologies
explain the personal suffering pain that
a society when it seizes up in flicks on
its citizenry I wrote my chapter on
gambling out of the Trump Taj Mahal in
Atlantic City before Donald Trump ever
announced he was running for president
and at that point the Taj had fallen
into deep decline there was rodents all
over the place I mean people would sit
in one of the downstairs restaurants and
watch the mice run across the floor
there was mold mildew
rooms were mothballed attics were
shooting up in the elevators a kind of
window into the world or the America
Donald Trump is about to create and the
common denominator that I found most
people I didn't know this till I began
the book most people who gamble gamble
on slots 80% of gamblers go to slot
machines which are designed to enesta
size you to to turn you into kind of
zombie-like state much like heroin or
opioids and the gaming industry or the
gambling industry is quite astute about
how to build an environment by which you
lose all sense of time or space that's
why there are no clocks there are no
windows people will sit for hours and
it's called time on device and of course
they're completely tracked many of the
mechanisms of the security and
surveillance state are actually taking
from the gambling industry which creates
very sophisticated profiles I mean even
to the point where they have projected
how much again a habitual gambler will
spend during his or her lifetime and I
wanted in the book to I think focus on
that what Durkheim call that enemy to
make it clear that if we didn't
radically restructure our society we
these pathologies would only grow and
were flirting now with a very dangerous
situation another economic collapse and
even the New York Times which is usually
extremely cautious ran at editorial two
or three days ago talking about that
possibility as whatever tp'ed reforms
have been were created under dodd-frank
being removed under the Trump
administration but this time around
the financial elites don't have a plan B
they can't lower interest rates any more
than they were already lowered to
virtually zero and you saw central banks
in Europe actually paying people to
borrow money so you have these huge
financial institutions like goldman
sachs and within the american political
system it is impossible to vote against
the interests of goldman sachs you can't
do it doesn't matter who you vote for
that extract and numbers vary for seven
trillion dollars much of it just printed
money fabricated money what Marx called
fictitious capital and and what they do
with it is not they don't they don't
build new manufacturing centers they
don't create jobs they use money to make
money and the way they do it is through
two ways debt peonage which is severe
debt student loan debt for instance in
the United States is now almost 1.5
trillion dollars which is not these kids
are cannot pay it back I mean this is
probably the first bubble to go and now
we saw with these recent tax cuts what
they're doing is buying back their own
stock that's why the stock market is so
inflated so they're buying back their
own stock because their compensation
packages are tied to the value of the
stock of the major managers and CEOs but
all of this is unsustainable in the long
term and the failure on the parts of the
elites to deal with the pathologies that
they have unleashed and the rise of a
demagogue like Trump I think is
potentially extremely dangerous for the
trajectory of the United States we have
if you take a list of the
characteristics of late dying empires
whether it's the Roman Empire the
austro-hungarian Empire we have
managed to check almost all of them off
including what is a often a common
characteristic of late Empire and that's
disastrous and self-destructive military
adventurism I'm you saw it the Soviet
Union in Afghanistan you can go all the
way back and look at ancient Athens in
the Athenian Empire when they invade
Sicily and their entire Navy is
destroyed and most of their soldiers are
killed the Empire breaks apart
austro-hungarian Empire starting World
War one over the assassination of the
Archduke Ferdinand and his wife Sophie
this is a characteristic of late Empire
and the British for instance in 1956
when they attempted to invade Egypt when
Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal
now that British Empire had been in a
slow decline since the end of World War
one but this was this is what finished
them off they had to retreat in
humiliation the pound sterling was
dropped as the world's reserve currency
and the British economy went into
freefall so that's that's I think the
fear of you know major historians and
writers about Empire Alfred McCoy and
others is that once that the dollar is
dropped as as the world's reserve
currency the Empire contracts very
swiftly and very violently although
foreign Wars become unsustainable
imports become very expensive and with
the weakening of the the traditional
liberal class and the destruction of
radical populist movements including the
destruction of labor unions were in a
very different situation than we were in
the 1930s when you had powerful
movements and people right the Communist
Party out of the American history but it
was an important movement the
progressives the old CIO that pressured
Roosevelt to respond
Roosevelt's say
the private sector can't create jobs
then it's the job of the government as
last resort to create to create
employment and that's where you get 12
million jobs and Social Security and
Roosevelt says that his greatest
achievement is that he saved capitalism
but our situation today is extremely
different and you have with the with a
loss of credibility of both democratic
institutions and the ruling ideology and
no real vision ideological vision to
take its place this is very fertile
ground for proto-fascist demagogues some
Paul Krugman who's often very sober at a
column yesterday that talked about the
United States becoming hungry which is
about as close to a modern version of
fascism as you can get and I and I I I
you look at Trump I mean I would just
say that that you know going back and
looking at those presidential elections
that we went through the the the when
this period of history is written I
think the greatest tragedy is that if
the Democratic Party leadership had not
fixed the primaries against Bernie
Sanders he not only would have won but
he would have beaten Trump he might have
been paralyzed probably would be
paralyzed in Washington with a
republican-controlled Congress but you
wouldn't get the kinds of appointments
Betsy DeVos whose privatizing education
the destruction of the EPA and the you
know the massive tax cuts that I will
extract or over a ten-year period mean
the federal revenue will decline or
we'll lose 1.5 trillion dollars and I
think the ruling elites are well aware
that across the political spectrum
they've lost credibility I
that that fear of a loss of credibility
manifests itself in what they're doing
to critics of capitalism and imperialism
who already are pushed off of public
broadcasting pushed to the margins of
the Internet but you see this attempt to
attack figures such as myself as as
agents of a foreign power you have
anonymous and shadowy groups prop or not
propaganda or not which we still don't
know who's behind it
trumpeted on the front page of the
Washington Post listing sites including
all major left-wing sites in the United
States
counterpunch alternate truth out
TruthDig world socialist website black
agenda report as disseminating Russian
propaganda although it's completely
false and that triggered Google Twitter
Facebook to impose algorithms to divert
traffic away from these sites so for
instance I write a weekly column every
Monday for TruthDig and you have what
they call impressions so if you went to
Google and you typed in imperialism and
I had written a column recently on
imperialism it would come up with other
articles now it won't because those
algorithms serve as filters so the
referrals from algorithms on TruthDig
alone have fallen in the last 12 months
from over 700,000 to below 200,000 and
alternates traffic is down by 63% and I
think that's because the the ruling
elites don't have a counter argument
anymore and so therefore these critics
become more dangerous you couple that
with the abolition of net neutrality
where you can tear the internet and you
have a very effective mechanism by which
you can already take marginalized voices
and critics and analysis which does not
appear on media platforms including
public broadcasting which is now a
wholly owned subsidiary of the Koch
brothers and and you further diminish
its ability to reach a public I mean we
sometimes forget in America that if you
went back to the 1960s and you looked at
public broadcasting you could see Noam
Chomsky who's been blacklisted for years
including by my paper the New York Times
my former paper you could see Malcolm X
James Baldwin Howard Zinn Ralph Nader
and those voices have all vanished from
the American landscape and what's risen
to take its place is a kleptocrat a con
artist and and and and all of the
kleptocrats around him who have
turbocharged or accelerated the pillage
of the nation and I should say the
pillage of the very structures of
government that are that maintain a
capitalist democracy and this of course
was an understanding that Karl Marx had
when he wrote about the late stages of
capitalism he said there comes a point
when capitalists unable to extract
profit from an exploited working class
that who's had its wages decline I mean
wages in the United States are
technically they're stagnant but in real
terms of course they've declined since
the 70s then they start cannibalizing
the very systems of the governmental
systems that that that make that
capitalist democracy possible and that
of course if you look at the Department
of Education under Betsy DeVos it's
about privatizing public education
because the federal government in the
United States spends about 63 billion
dollars a year on public education and
the hedge funds want it and they're
going to get it it is about everything
as becomes privatized we have our
brother Eric prince arguing now that the
war in Afghanistan shall be privatized
seventy percent of US intelligence
gathering is privatized beause Allen
Hamilton for instance where Edward
Snowden left from 99 percent of its
revenue comes from the
government I teach in a prison every you
still have a state in federal structures
nominally running the prison but
internally for-profit corporations have
taken over every aspect the commissary
the money transfer the phone rates which
are astronomical far higher than and
this is for me particularly cruel since
foremost incarcerated parents the only
connection they have with their children
is through the telephone and now they
have email you know eating absurdly
priced emails I think it's 40 cents an
email or something all sorts of fines
that you if you go to a prison
Dostoyevsky once wrote that if you want
to understand the true nature of a
society go to a prison and watch what
they do to the most vulnerable and now
we are seeing corporations being lobbied
by prison officials in the United States
to come back and use bonded labor in the
prisons they said you don't need to be
in Bangladesh and pay 22 or 32 cents an
hour you can come to the prison and pay
20 no that workers in if you're in
prison and you have a job you're paid 22
cents an hour in the state of New Jersey
that's 28 dollars a month if you're in
Alabama you're not paid at all and we
now have huge corporations McDonald's
for instance makes its uniforms in
prison you have huge corporations 1
million prisoners working in China like
conditions within the American prison
system and of course they can't strike
they can't complain about their working
conditions they're not paid for sick
days there's no vacation time obviously
no benefits and if they ever cause a
problem they're locked in solitary
confinement for one or two years and
this is the natural trajectory of where
we're headed unless we rise up and stop
it and none of the political figures
within the United States have any intent
of addressing the social inequality
which is becoming more and more
pronounced by the day
which has fuel these pathologies and
created a situation whereby this cabal
innocent this cabal of oligarchs and and
corporatists have redirected the
mechanisms that that that once made
piecemeal and incremental reform
possible towards enriching and
empowering themselves and anytime a
cabal whether it's maniacal fascist
communist or corporate seizes power the
political system in essence seizes up it
doesn't work as its supposed as it's
designed to work it works to to
concentrate more and more wealth and
power for this cabal and the propaganda
that is fed to this disenfranchised
working-class which began under Reagan
and Thatcher is that and of course this
is Reagan's great line government is not
the solution government is the problem
well government is also the only
mechanism by which the citizens can
defend themselves from predators from
especially corporate redditors and they
change the narrative to one of your
personal identity is under assault they
did this Thatcher did this in Britain
and would and of course we've ended up
with Breck brexit and figures like Boris
Johnson and Reagan did it in the United
States and you have a proliferation now
of knee allistic violent acts constant
mass shootings and the rise of heavily
armed right-wing proto-fascist hate
groups who are being increasingly as
things deteriorate being given license
by the highest levels of the federal
government by the white house to carry
out acts of violence and you watch
Trump's rhetoric which
is an incitement to violence you look at
his recent speech to evangelicals and it
you know that's Hofstadter's the
paranoid style of American politics
projecting acts of violence or saying
that they're that their opponents in
particular in the Democratic Party
intend to carry out violence and what I
fear is that you know we live in a
period at this moment of relative
stability but at that moment that the
next crash comes at that moment when
finally the dollar is dropped as the
reserve currency we have set in place
political forces that will create a very
frightening dystopia and make America at
least as we have known it throughout our
lifetimes unrecognizable the one has to
always be cognizant of the fact that the
DNA of American society is deeply
violent we are a nation founded on
genocide and and and on slavery and we
believe to this day in violence as a
form of purification regeneration
through violence
we fetishize the the guns and the gun
culture the NRA which is just a creation
of the arms lot of the weapons
manufacturers is disseminating
assault-style weapons throughout the
country and rather than rationally
respond to this madness our latest
solution is to teach put concealed
handguns on kindergarten teachers so I
will close by saying that unless and I'm
not predicting this but unless the
United States spills mass movements that
can carry out
sustained acts of civil just nonviolent
civil disobedience such as we saw it
standing Rock such as you had here in
Canada with the First Nations peoples or
the Quebec student movement any
mechanism to hold this slide into
corporate tyranny will be taken from us
and the ripple effect will be you will
feel it Canada is not immune it won't
become the the the problems will never
be as pronounced as they are in the
United States because empires themselves
are by nature fragile entities they
depend on the extraction of resources
abroad the control of foreign labor
whereas Canada not being an imperial
power is more self-contained but
nevertheless you you won't be free we
saw it we see it with the election of
Ford you you don't have anywhere near
the mass shootings we do but you have
them these you have you know your Prime
Minister's very much very Obama like in
and we see it with his with the his
refusal to stand up to the fossil fuel
industry and the Stark tar sands and the
consequences of that are dangerous I
mean the the the the tragedy of Obama's
election is that he came in with a kind
of mandate and he perhaps because of
political and experience he had only
spent two years in the Senate perhaps
because of cynicism I don't know he
reimpose elites by re-inflate
houses and banks which had defrauded the
American citizen and defrauded
institutions you know city city pension
plans were wiped out by 40% and nothing
was ever done to to address the crimes
that were committed against the victims
I didn't even mention climate change but
you throw climate change in there and
every climate change report that you
read has one subtext which is is that
it's happening far faster than any of us
predicted and so as I write in the book
you know we have to resist because if we
don't resist we can't use the word hope
and yet at the same time and perhaps
that's our greatest existential crisis
we also have to understand how bleak the
situation is around us that there is a
moral dimension to resistance you know I
fight I don't fight fascists in the end
because I'll win I fight fascists
because they are fascists what Kant or
Hannah Aaron would have called radical
evil forces of Thanatos or death as
Freud would have pointed out and there's
very very little time left we will stand
up to these forces that are
disemboweling our nation's that are
destroying our democratic institutions
and that have commodified the ecosystem
for short-term profit or we will soon
have to begin to face the very real
possibility of the extinction of the
human species we are at a moment in
human history this 10,000 year period
when the climate created conditions by
which we built human civilizations move
from settle societies to cities is
rapidly drawing to a close and to be
complacent is to be complicit I'm not
the only person in this room to have
children and yes you know we may fail
but at least let's rise up so that our
own children can look back and say we
tried thank you very much
[Applause]
thanks Christopher really wonderful book
and a stimulating talk as well um so let
me explain how this this part of evening
will work I have three or four questions
that I asked of Chris to get things
going and then you'll see there are two
microphones in here one at the front of
the room here I'll turn it open to you
and you can come down and ask questions
of Chris I'd ask if you just ask one
question per speaker that would be ideal
and I also have some questions from
people who are watching in the the
overflow room around the corner okay
Chris so America the fair will too is an
angry book it's one that also has a
great deal of compassion I think in it
for the people that you've met and the
dire circumstances that they find
themselves in but like to begin with a
question about the political utility of
anger particularly as it seems to be
angry as one of the defining features of
the age that we can refine ourselves in
so it can anger be constructive is it
useful yes I I teach in a prison if you
don't walk out the door of that prison
you're not angry what has been done to
these people than you lack compassion
Augustine said that Hope has two
beautiful daughters anger and courage
anger the way things are encouraged to
see that they don't remain the way they
are that's different from hatred but if
you can't be angry at what they're doing
to the natural world to democratic open
society to the poor
[Music]
one of the things that's so
heartbreaking and it was something that
I constantly ran into reporting this
book was the hopelessness of these kids
who could if if they were fortunate they
got a low-wage job it wasn't a job that
offered them any kind of meaningful
future it wasn't a job where they felt
they were contributing to society and
that I think was most heartbreaking to
crush the dreams of the young in the
name of profit and you know was is one
of the greatest crimes of corporate
power we talk about American stories in
American myths one thing that's always
struck me about nights is how persistent
some of these myths and one that seems
to have undergone like a revival in
recent years is the myth of American
exceptionalism and you point out in the
book this is one that's shared by
liberals and conservatives it's writes
it's slightly so why do you consider the
myth American American exceptionalism be
such a damaging one toxic brew right
well James Baldwin I think probably
addressed this as well as any American
writer and his argument was that the
longer essentially the white power
structure refused to confront what they
had done and who they were
the longer they manufactured this faux
innocence and goodness and virtue the
more monstrous they became and Donald
Trump is a kind of figure that
exemplifies this utter inability to be
not just self-critical but truthful and
[Music]
American society I mean one of the
reasons that
corporate power assaults public
education and in particular make makes
war on the humanities is because when
the humanities are taught right they
teach you not what to think but how to
think they are by nature subversive
because you are meant to critique
structures of power ask questions that
the ruling elites don't want asked and
so from every level from the bottom to
the top of American society it has
become vocational so if you are in a
marginal community you are given enough
literacy numerical literacy to work in a
fast-food restaurant or stack shelves in
a Walmart if you're at Princeton and
I've taught there and the the biggest
major at Princeton is computer science
which is also true at Harvard you are
trained vocational you've given
vocational training to work at Goldman
Sachs so you become a Systems Manager at
simply a higher level you become a
manager who's compensated quite a bit
but your job is to maintain the system
not to question it so when we had the
2008 crash there was no ability to
question the system it was only about
reinf lating it as Ralph Nader pointed
out with that kind of money we could
have created public banks in every state
we could have given them ten billion
dollars each they could have leveraged
themselves ten to one and all these
people whose mortgages were underwater
could have been given new mortgages but
that that the the the the mandarins in
power who come out of these institutions
are not even trained to ask those
questions and I think what's so
frightening about the elites now is that
they're utterly unplugged from the real
world they don't fly commercial airlines
they live a writer for The New Yorker
called it they don't even live in
America they live in richest an and its
global and yet they have total power so
if you read Joseph Tanner's the collapse
of complex
societies where he talks about how
societies collapse he looks at 24
civilizations he said in that final
stage the elites retreat into their
version of Versailles or the Forbidden
City utterly unaware of what's happening
outside the gates and to maintain a
level of opulence and hedonism they push
a population with diminished resources
harder and harder and harder until until
it goes down and that's precisely what's
going on in this book and in previous
books you alluded it to it earlier today
you've been highly critical of Christian
right the United States so can you help
us understand the seemingly unwavering
yet also credibly hypocritical support
that the Christian Right has for the
current incumbent in the white house see
I don't look at it as hypocritical I
spent two years writing that book and I
went and like any reporter and that's
the only way you understand I think I
went to mega church services I went to
creationist weekends actually I went I
took a course to be certified to teach
creationism
but it's fascinating because it's in the
details that you understand the
absurdity of it so according to
creationism the account of the creation
of the world in Genesis is factually
true but it does create a problem
because God doesn't create a light until
the 4th day so our teacher was saying
well just tell them that God created a
temporary light that's not in Genesis
but it's it's there that you see the the
species of magical thinking that is
endemic as Hannah Erin points out to all
forms of totalitarianism these mega
church pastors are trumpian they are
phenomenally wealthy they pray man make
their fortune there are millionaires off
of people's despair by promising them
that magic Jesus will solve all of their
problems as long as they keep giving
seed gifts and buying prayer cloths and
all this kind of stuff they haven't
created a classic system of totalitarian
indoctrination where you invite people
into the service which has nice music
and like the Presbyterian Church there's
like comfortable chairs to sit and but
then they suck you into what again going
back to errant crawls the systems of
indoctrination which we don't see so
suddenly all of your educational time
your leisure time your religious time is
devote is is occupied by this church you
are assigned a disciple or any kind of
questioning becomes backsliding and I
read when I was writing this book
Margaret singers book called cults in
our midst and I really came to believe
that this was cultish and I I went in
there with the usual prejudices of the
liberal Christian but the more I
interviewed these people the more they
their stories broke my heart
sexual abuse domestic abuse evictions
prolonged and chronic underemployment or
unemployment splintered families
addictions alcoholism and that's why
they have this lust for the end times
and I went to an end times weekend in
Detroit it was appropriately located
with with Tim LaHaye and and they have
this whole you know the rapture is never
in the Bible I mean this stuff's just
totally invented but I really came to
see by being around these people that
they're they hate I think the core
emotion of this movement is hate they
hate the world they hate the real world
for almost destroying them and at the
end of that book I came to the
conclusion that the only way we will
break this movement is to reintegrate
these people back into the economy to
give them stability to give them a
sustainable income to give them hope and
you you you will never talk them out of
this belief in fact if you begin to try
and challenge them they get incredibly
defensive and incredibly angry so Trump
is a natural and you know the sexual
proclivities of these mega pastors is
right in sync with Trump's lifestyle I
mean look at Jim and Tammy Faye Bakker
so people say it's hypocritical how
could Trump no no and there it's it's a
perfect marriage they're a political
movement they're they're about the
prosperity gospel they're not about the
gospel they're about their perversion of
the gospel they're about preying on
people in despair they are about
sacrificing the American Empire fusing
the iconography and language of American
patriotism with the Christian religion
and we saw that in Germany with the
German Christian Church and that's what
they are
and and my attack on liberals especially
liberal Christians is that in the name
of tolerance they gave these people a
credibility they should never have had
that one of my other questions was you
know why why'd you give liberal such a
hard time
because they are hypocrites they they
want the appearance of morality without
actually engaging in a moral struggle
they want to posit themselves as the
moral Center while never taking risks
I mean King saw this at the end of the
civil rights movement
so liberals were willing white liberals
in the North we're willing to support
king's efforts for desegregation but
once king called for economic justice
and King understood that if there was
not economic justice they would never be
racial justice the liberals went for the
door and the the the liberal class and
Chomsky I think is done for me the best
job of explaining the role of a liberal
class in a capitalist democracy the
liberal class functions as a safety
valve so that it can ameliorate or
adjust the system like Roosevelt did it
can decry the excesses of the system
without ever questioning the system
itself but but in exchange for in a in a
capitalist democracy in exchange for
giving liberals their positions and
universities are on the media the quid
pro quo is that they discredit radicals
they discredit people who question the
motives of those who started the war in
Vietnam or those who started the war in
Iraq and I've been a victim of that I
mean I was very outspoken against the
war in Iraq and I was an prime target
because I had been the Middle East
bureau chief for the New York Times so
actually understood the Middle East had
spent months of my life in Iraq and
understood the instrument of war and so
by name I was fiercely attacked by the
liberal class who were all useful idiots
for George Bush
and because they had to take me down now
once the war went bad they were able to
do mia Copas and say well we are we
meant well they meant well but it was
misguided it was wrong and that that's
really mendacious because they didn't
make a mistake they played the role to
which they were allotted and that's why
all of these people who were completely
wrong about the war in Iraq
starting with Thomas Friedman are still
have the purchase that they have because
they they played their role very well
and and and you know I in my book death
of liberal class I talked a lot about
this but as I told no I should have put
him in as a co-author because I think my
entire understanding of liberal
liberalism comes from Noam Chomsky yeah
so this is my last question and so I
invite you to start to come down if you
have any questions you'd like to ask
Chris so the singer-songwriter Steve
Earle often describes himself as a
socialist who lives in a country without
a viable Socialist Party and I'm
wondering if you feel same and also what
you think would be required to changes
though is the creation of a viable
Socialist Party and even remotely likely
but the near future the United States
it's extremely remote sadly because I
believe that if we responded in a
rational way to what's happening that
would mean a massive jobs program
especially targeted at people under the
age of 25 a rational healthcare system
for all citizens I know your systems is
underfunded buying and that's
intentional but you know where people
had access to good healthcare without
having to have for-profit insurance
corporations hold their sick children
hostage while they try and bankrupt
themselves to save their sons or
daughters a guaranteed minimum income
reparations for African Americans that's
very high on my list because it's not
only a matter of just
it is a matter of white America coming
to grips with what they did and who they
are
the I mean as John Ralston Saul has
often pointed out these trade agreements
are really masks they're not really
trade agreements they have been used as
a subterfuge to create gigantic tax
havens for huge financial industries and
corporations at the expense of the
citizenry to gut all sorts of labor and
environmental regulations
I'm not against trade agreements I'm
against what these that the trade you
know what's what's advertised as trade
agreements the forgiving of student debt
I mean it's obscene what we've done to
these kids if we began to institute
these are all you know socialists I gave
a talk and I think was the University of
Winnipeg and I finished and in the back
row was the economics faculty and before
I could begin to answer questions one of
the professors stood up and said I just
want all the students to know that he's
not a Marxist he's just a radical
Keynesian and it turns out they were all
Marxist which I thought was so healthy
you'd never see that in America if you
didn't sign on to neoliberal economics
you would never get an appointment
anywhere and actually he's right I'm I'm
a kind of radical Keynesian I mean my
idea of socialism comes out of the
Scandinavian countries in the 1980s and
they've had roll backs of course where
they eradicated poverty where mentally
ill people did not have to sleep on
heating grates or were thrown in prison
25% of our prison population has severe
mental disorders and I'm in the prison
they are drugged with psychotropic drugs
all day long they sleep all day we're a
public schoolteacher a senior public
school teacher would earn as much as a
doctor this is we have created our
worlds like that and that is the only
way our
society will heal unfortunately you're
right the the left has been destroyed
the liberal class has been destroyed we
don't even have a media platform to get
there's no debate if you watch American
media certainly the electronic media
they never debate health care they never
allow proponents of single-payer
universal on because factually we spend
more than any other industrialized
country I think it's 18% of GDP and we
have the least efficient health care
service in the world with all the
statistics to prove it but the the
for-profit insurance pharmaceutical
health care they have a lock on what
information gets out and what doesn't so
with a corroded media platform with the
destruction of even the liberal wing
within the Democratic Party with the
death of labor unions 6% of the American
workforce outside the public sector is
even unionized and the union leadership
is often completely bankrupt so you saw
it with the teachers strike which in
Oklahoma and other states which is a
sign of hope Virginia or West Virginia
and but they defied their own people
don't often remember they've defied
their own union leadership which call
them to sign the contract so if we don't
have that kind of movement and we
continue to barrel towards the kind of
economic collapse that is coming then we
will go the way countries in Europe when
in the 1930s
I mean people if the Nazi Party in 1928
was in the single digits then you had
the 1929 crash you had the Social
Democrats in power but what did they do
they catered to the demands of the world
banking system imposed punishing
austerity measures this was Ebert
including revoking unemployment
insurance it was insane and suicidal and
it it elevated these and and believe me
in Germany and vimar Germany the Nazis
were as buffoonish as Donald Trump and
that was true also in Yugoslavia
everybody knew Radovan
heritage was a nut but they were so
angry at the system and they had every
right to be angry at the system and I I
don't take Trump's very open incitements
to violence lightly because I watched
slobodan milosevic Karadzic and others
use the same kind of rhetoric in the
lead-up to the war in Yugoslavia thank
you so let's say we have to the audience
first question that yes thank you say go
say my guy go welcome to the Grand River
watershed so it's one of the largest
watersheds very important in
southwestern Ontario in a bit of a
bellwether so things that we do here
have a habit of catching on you know
because we're trendy we discharge into
Lake Erie and Lake Erie as far as the
Great Lakes are concerned if you by any
measure is a lake in trouble one of the
Great Lakes in trouble so one of the
things that we're considering here with
things like the water school for
decision makers and whatnot is
integrating with public school
curriculum which is then available to
any school but creating curriculum and
specifically combining indigenous
science with modern technology in order
to bring the standards and the
regulatory framework up to where it
needs to be to for the public to fight
off predatory development and then
integrate that with our legislative
framework so my question for you is on
your side of the medicine line what's
your feel for the willingness or the
desire of educators in the public system
on the Americans side to co-create some
new water laws for our shared watersheds
since I think it's in the Great Lakes
region there's Ontario the province of
Ontario and like seven states or
something that actually maybe it could
be eight well the public school system
in the United States is in deep distress
they don't even have basic supplies
teachers have to often how to diminish
salaries buy the supplies including
toilet paper either send out letters
where parents have to send in
items like toilet paper for the kids and
this is all by design it is about
creating charter schools which are it's
it's that stem model where it's all
about science technology math as a way
to create to slot people into the
corporate mechanism so we're very far
away I mean much of the textbooks for
instance in the United States are
controlled by these right-wing entities
like Texas I mean it's kind of appalling
actually what is inside school textbooks
in the United States which glorify
robert e lee minimised the slavery
essentially erase the labor struggles
and the radical movements and the
radical figures that as howard zinn
pointed out opened up democracy so were
we're not anywhere near I mean maybe
you'll get there Canada has a habit of
copying us years later but right now
you're in a far healthier situation than
we are so one of the things that is
proposed that puts us in that healthcare
situation oh sorry just grab grab me
afterwards I'm not going anywhere oh
that's okay this is the third time I've
heard you mr. hedges I just want to say
once again thank you for being the
Prophet Amos in our midst I much
appreciate that very much I do have a
question
I'm I take some heart in the 50th
anniversary the second resurrection city
campaign in the States could you comment
on that the 50 year where William barber
the second and Liz Thea Harris that
strikes me as a good step in the right
direction of the Poor People's Campaign
yeah yeah because I they're addressing
the issue I know the Democratic Party is
trying as hard as they can to co-op
barber which I hope they don't do
because the Democratic Party is as
culpable for what's happened is the
Republican Party amen
but I have a tent I did attend their
protests in Washington and I I think
they're doing heroic work yeah cool
thank you hello there
as a recent undergraduate graduate of
economics in from the Waterloo
University of Waterloo you mentioned
about something about sustainable
finance and how it's being or it's not
being taught in Harvard and Stanford
schools I specialized in trade and
finance the major in economics I'm
wondering what you think would be the
best education available in sustainable
finance it's something that I've looked
at it looked into tried tried to find
programs in that realm I haven't been
able to find anything well the
sustainable finance means taxing the
rich at 90%
that's sustainable finance that's what
we used to have under Eisenhower was 91%
for the wealthiest elites when I live
even when I lived in Switzerland taxes
were about 50% but we had a great
educational system we had probably the
best health care system one of the best
health care systems in the world I David
Cay Johnston was written about this you
know these large corporations many of
them have just orchestrated tax boycotts
and that that is socialism we have to
begin to tax the hell out of these
people to rebuild our society no
specific programs you have in mind well
that's a specific program believe me if
Goldman Sachs had to pay 90% income tax
that would and every an Exxon Mobil and
Citibank and Raytheon and everyone else
I mean Bank of America didn't pay any
taxes zero they you know the the we
can't fun it's got money's got to come
from somewhere and of course we have to
slash the military I mean the bloated US
military is is one of the primary causes
of the economic decay within the United
States yeah well we be quite I mean we
we spend a trillion dollars a year on
the military so I mean that's also a
characteristic of leyte Empire I mean
the late Roman Empire was trying to fill
to 1 million man army but I think I
think taxation it's not about a matter
you can't teach people how to
responsibly manage their money when they
don't have any money and and and the the
you know Ralph Nader is not wrong he
calls these supranational global
corporations traitors to the
nation-state and that's what they are
and we are going to rest back control so
that we focus not on maximizing profit
but on the common good
or all gonna go down so before we go to
another question in this room I have a
question from the overflow room so
considering the polarization occurring
in the US and also globally what do you
foresee happening to our societies and
perhaps the second question isn't the
one you can answer in more detail how
can we as members of this of this
society address this issue I think we
have to look to the revolutions in
Eastern Europe which I covered East
Germany the former Czechoslovakia
Romania where large numbers of citizens
just took to the streets half a million
people every night invents a las Square
in Prague and I was there I was in the
Magic Lantern theater every night with
Vaslav Havel the demonstrations in
Leipzig and ending with again a half a
million people and Alexander Platz in
East Berlin and the you know moral
forces on our side because internally
these people know how gamed rigged and
corrupt the system is and as the the
theorists of revolution like crane
Brinton Jeffrey Davies and others have
pointed out and I am talking about
revolution although nonviolent because
revolutions are fundamentally nonviolent
even Lenin whose brother was hanged
because of an assassination the
assassination of Alexander the second
even the Russian Revolution was
nonviolent in this sense that once
significant sectors of control defect
the the government crumbles so for
instance when the Cossacks are sent to
crush the bread riots and refuse and
join the crowd the Tsar's finished he
can't even get back he has to abdicate
in a railway carriage on a siding same
was true in East Germany where Honaker
sent down an elite paratroop division
to fire on the demonstrators and Leipzig
when the paratroopers got there the
local Communist authorities refused to
deploy them in the streets Honaker was
out in a week and I think the elites are
well aware of how discredited they are
and that is why they have passed a
series of laws including section 1021 of
the National Defense Authorization Act
in the United States which overturns the
1878 posi comment Optus Act which banned
the military from acting as a domestic
police force that was actually done
under Obama I sued him in federal court
I won to his chagrin and the chagrin of
the NSA and they was a long story but
they appealed and they won an appeal by
denying me standing not by actually
going to trial so you have the wholesale
surveillance the militarization of
police the revoking of due process
I mean 94% of the people in our prison
system never had a jury trial and a
Hannah Aaron to go back to Hannah Aaron
again writes about this when she talks
about the status of the stateless in
Europe she herself trip stripped of her
German citizenship after being held by
the Gestapo for three weeks and is in
France and she said when you have a
segment of your population that is
stripped of their rights then rights
become privileges and you have already
created both illegal and a physical
mechanism that in a period of unrest
means everyone can be stripped of their
rights or their privilege and they're
running scenarios right and left pretty
cold-blooded scenarios they are
certainly preparing for unrest and the
way they are repairing for it is the
iron boot so we're never gonna win the
game of violence this is my battle with
an Tifa and the black bloc who you know
you just saw trump refer to an Tifa
which is the idea that an Tifa is even
worthy of mention as a serious
counterweight to the state
but part of my battle is that they are
effective only in allowing the power
leads to demonize the resistance and to
justify more draconian forms of control
in the streets they play into the hands
of the state but if we were able to
build a sustained if we pull those kinds
of numbers if we did what the Spaniards
did we surrounded the Congress if if
people were able to non-violently
essentially put themselves out in the
street to discredit there are enough
people within the system who who are
tasked with defending that system who
would not and that's what they fear I
mean I spent a lot of time in Zuccotti
Park in occupy and what frightened the
elites was the these couples who would
come in on the weekend from New Jersey
with their strollers up and that
terrified them and they know and you
know the the relationship with the New
York City police was quite fascinating
to watch because the the actual violence
was almost always carried out by the we
called them the white shirts the
officers but when the white shirts
weren't around there was quite a bit of
of fraternization between the blue
uniformed police and the kids in the
park you saw with the Chicago Teachers
strike that the teachers when they went
on strike would the the Chicago Police
opened up the precinct houses so that
they could use the bathrooms off and
often applauded them that terrifies the
state that's the way we're gonna bring
them down I'm not saying we will bring
them down but that is the only mechanism
by which we will bring them down yes sir
okay forgive the metaphor I'm about to
use but after listening to your address
I feel a lot like we're small boats
bobbing on a large wave and when you
talk about rebellion I
wonder if you would address them how
this room full of people after we leave
and go to our various parking lots go
about that whom do we repel against and
how well every community has issues of
corporate abuse every single one so for
instance in Denton Texas where the city
was is near fracking sites and children
were getting respiratory and all sorts
of other diseases the city voted to ban
fracking mobilized and voted to ban
fracking the State Legislature passed a
bill denying the city the right to ban
fracking I mean you can be sure that
they're not going to take this line down
they will respond I don't I'm not from
Waterloo but I can guarantee you that
there's stuff going down your railroad
tracks that should be blocked they're
our corporations in your midst that are
destroying your community I'm just not
versed in but it's everywhere
well you can't escape it and I think in
the end resistance will be local it'll
begin local I was at Standing Rock and
that was very very powerful and very
moving indigenous led and had a deep
spiritual element seven months of
resistance and and this was under Obama
the state responded with such ferocity
and fear over 700 arrests numerous
beatings the use of attack dogs
spraying using water cannons to spray
protesters in sub-freezing temperature
and the water was often laced with
pepper spray constant surveillance
overhead you saw them the drones the
planes when I got there in November
they'd already blocked most of the roads
and I had to go all the way around and
come in from the other side on these
dirt roads but even then I would be
stopped and I would be stopped and not
by law enforcement but by people who
were we're dressed in black wearing kev
our vast carrying long-barreled weapons
who had no identification
they were just private company goons
mercenaries and you can be sure that
when we begin to resist you'll know well
that you're having an effect because you
will meet that kind of response so I you
know local food is an issue anything
that you can do to to sever your
reliance on corporate power so
sustainable agriculture or anything you
can do to begin to cripple corporate
power I mean that's why you know I
became a vegan because the animal
agriculture industry many people argue
is as destructive maybe more destructive
than the fossil fuel industry and it's
it's an easy thing for everyone to get
up to do and it's also better for your
health so you know in in both the the
minutia of our daily lives as well as
the lives of our community we have to be
cognizant of what's happening and and we
have to organize and you have to
organize the we have to build
relationships to pit power against power
and we have to recognize that those
relationships can only be built the way
relationships are always built and
that's face-to-face not electronically
if you sit alone in front of your
computer you know writing screeds on
Facebook about climate change you are
exactly where the corporate powers want
you to be alone in your room in front of
a screen
so this is our last question of the
evening oh lucky me hi Chris I've been
following you for a while I'm very glad
you're here and thank you for your great
work recently I've become quite
interested in tipping points and how did
you see that did you see any sort of
tipping points in those nonviolent
revolutions you covered in Europe and
how they came about well that's a
fascinating question because so having
covered those revolutions what I learned
is that the purported leaders of the
revolution spend all of their time
scrambling to understand what's
happening that when people rise up I
mean remember that the demonstrations in
Leipzig began largely led by lutheran
clergy and their one demand was that the
government give them legal status and it
ended with the destruction of the Stasi
state and the end of the Berlin Wall I
mean I was in Leipzig on the afternoon
of November 9th with the leaders of the
East German Revolution and one of them
said to me maybe in a year we'll have
free passage back and forth across the
Berlin Wall
by 7 o'clock that night the Berlin Wall
did not exist as an impediment to human
traffic Lenin six weeks before the
Bolshevik Revolution or the Russian
Revolution gives a speech in Switzerland
and said well you know people my age we
won't see the revolution in our lifetime
no one knows it's a mist what is the
tipping point it's usually something so
mundane so banal but it just muscies a
population over the edge and no one can
predict it I mean that's where my hope
lies I know the tinder is there I don't
know what will light it I don't know
when it will be lit but it's there and
and so I mean what was moving about
the Revolution in Czechoslovakia was the
figure of Havel because Havel had been
was a non-person in communist
Czechoslovakia if you wanted to hear
Havel you had to listen to Voice of
America and many of you know the history
of Havel and in turn out of jail and
stuff and he wasn't a very charismatic
speaker or you know but he had the moral
authority and everyone in Czechoslovakia
knew it and he had been resisting since
charter 77 for a long time at great
personal cost and they knew he would not
sell them out you know there were a
population is often more cognizant than
it appears on the surface so a story I
have told before but in Prague that
winter there were posters of Yann
Pollock all around the city
now Yann Pollock had been young Charles
University student had gone to Vince Law
Square to protest the 1978 1968 Soviet
invasion and overthrow of Dubcek
and he'd lit himself on fire and four
days later he died of his burns his
funeral which attracted hundreds maybe
thousands of students was it was never
covered by the state media when he was
buried and his grave became a shrine his
body was exhumed and his remains were
cremated his ashes were given to his
mother and she was told she couldn't
Ribery them a week after the communist
government fell 10,000 Czechs marched to
Red Army Square and renamed at Yann
Pollock square mark tacuba shaiva the
great singer who's saying a prayer for
Marto which was the anthem of defiance
that was broadcast over the airwaves as
the Soviets invaded once Dubcek was
overthrown and the pro-soviet regime was
installed her entire recording stock was
destroyed she was banned from the
airwaves and for the intervening years
she worked on an assembly line at a toy
factory
I was invents a las square with half a
million checks when she walked out on
the balcony December it was snowing and
she began to sing the prayer for Marta
and every check in the crowd knew every
word that's the power of resistance it
has a moral force it is as Daniel
Berrigan once told me when I asked him
to find faith it is the belief that the
good draws to it the good and
empirically everything around us may say
otherwise but I believe that that's
right that in the end resistance against
radical evil is an act of faith it is
the belief that the good draws to it the
good it is what Auden called that ironic
point of light that flashes out wherever
the just exchanged their messages that
our job even however lonely it may be at
that moment is to keep that narrative
alive and if we can keep that narrative
alive then we can use the word hope
[Applause]
so by way of closing and thanks let me
Jason just make one or two points one
through thirteen or so books and now the
last 90 minutes we know what makes Chris
Hedges Chris Hedges and we've now had in
this region and at C G and all of you in
the overflow room speaking of electronic
communication and on the web a sense of
what the power of the argument is and in
my sense it is that Chris brings us the
power of observation of the journalist
and combines that with the breadth and
depth and analysis of the philosopher
and historian and in the process Sobers
up
Sobers us up a lot in fact in his most
recent book by all means please buy it
we have a reception and signing ceremony
outside the chapters have such since
scintillating titles as heroin hate
sadism decay there's even a chapter
called freedom which is actually all
about the jailing system in the US but
through it all there's also as we saw in
the question and answer in the speech
hope that there's things we can do both
locally and nationally and globally that
there are systems out there and that
they're not all necessarily radical
systems the Scandinavian model which in
some sense is you have highlighted has
been with us as a social democratic
model for a good century or so and so
although it might seem dark and it might
seem as if Canada's just behind the u.s.
and these things the fact is there's
also hope left to take care of some of
these chapter titles before they become
reality finally I thought in the last
answer Chris reminded us that as in
everything else in life in Revolution
too timing is everything and we don't
always get it right and we can't predict
it but thank you Chris Thank You Darren
Malloy thank you David wohl Worsley
always a pleasure to work with
Wordsworth books here at cg thank you
all for joining let me also say before
we break that this is you've you've got
a soft Chris to a great start we usually
begin our
programs at cg the public ones in
September but you've beaten us again
timing by a week and and and given us a
houseful show October 17 by the way
we're showing a film here called human
wave which is a film by AI weiwei on on
migration and refugees and all of that
and it too is promises to be an evening
to remember but for this evening thank
you again Chris thank you all for
joining and have a great evening
[Applause]
[Music]